---
layout: post
---

In K&R C Programming Book, there's an example of using a
binary tree to store the words and the number of their
occurences in the text. I read the chapter and tried
to reproduce the program from memory. The program
is using pointers and is 52 lines long.

It took me 2-3 hours to write and debug the program, mainly
because I assumed that uninitialized pointers in C are
equal to NULL. It's not the case with GCC compiler,
and maybe there's a flag to set this behavior, but I don't know how.

Once I manually initialized all pointers to NULLs, the things went
faster, and as long as I remembered to do this consistently,
I finished the program, and on input "now is the time to
say the good night wishes" it printed:

    c:\apps\cfunc\a.exe
    now 1
    is 1
    good 1
    night 1
    the 2
    say 1
    time 1
    to 1
    wishes 1

and here's the program:
    
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <string.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    
    char *phrase[] = {
        "now", "is", "the", "time", "to",
        "say", "the", "good", "night", "wishes"
    };
    
    #define NWORDS  ( sizeof( phrase ) / ( sizeof( phrase[0] )))
    
    struct tnode {
        char* word;
        int count;
        struct tnode *left;
        struct tnode *right;
    };
    
    struct tnode *addtree(struct tnode *root, char *word);
    void treeprint(struct tnode *root);
    
    int main(int argc, char *argv[])
    {
        int i;
        struct tnode *root = NULL;

        for (i = 0; i < NWORDS; i++) {
            root = addtree(root, phrase[i]);
        }
        treeprint(root);
    }
    
    struct tnode *addtree(struct tnode *node, char *word)
    {
        int rc;
    
        if (node == NULL) {
            node = malloc(sizeof(struct tnode));
            node->word = strdup(word);
            node->count = 1;
            node->left = node->right = NULL;
        } else if ((rc = strcmp(word, node->word)) == 0)
            node->count++;
        else if (rc < 0) 
            node->left = addtree(node->left, word);
        else
            node->right = addtree(node->right, word);
        return node;
    }
    
    void treeprint(struct tnode *root)
    {
        if (root == NULL)
                return;
    
        printf("%s %d\n", root->word, root->count);
        if (root->left != NULL)
            treeprint(root->left);
        if (root->right != NULL)
            treeprint(root->right);
    }
    

I was curious to see who long would it take me to write a
similar program in Python using the same tree structure
of the nodes, each of which has four elements: word, count,
a ref to the left branch, and a ref to the right branch.

My program was 26 lines, and it took me about an hour to
finish. Twice is short, and at least twice less time.
    
    WORD, COUNT, LEFT, RIGHT = 0, 1, 2, 3
    
    def treeprint(root):
        if not root:
            return
        word, cnt, left, right = root
        print(word, cnt)
        if left:
            treeprint(left)
        if right:
            treeprint(right)
    
    def addtree(node, word):
        if not node:
            return [word, 1, None, None]
        if word == node[WORD]:
            node[COUNT] += 1
        elif word < node[WORD]:
            node[LEFT] = addtree(node[LEFT], word)
        else:
            node[RIGHT] = addtree(node[RIGHT], word)
        return node
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        phrase = "now is the time to say the good night wishes".split()
        root = None
        for word in phrase:
            root = addtree(root, word)
        treeprint(root)

So yes, the same recursion, and is easier to read and faster
to write and debug.

Morale may seem obvious but I felt nostalgy when I was
writing the C program.

And if I would reproduce the same functionality 
using the native Python's dictionary, my program becomes 12 lines of code,
because there's no need for a recursion and
the tree implementation is hidden in a Python's dictionary:
    
    def treeprint(root):
        for k in root:
            print(k, root[k])
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        phrase = "now is the time to say the good night wishes".split()
        root = dict()
        for word in phrase:
            if word in root:
                root[word] += 1
            else:
                root[word] = 1
        treeprint(root)

